docs/development.md, before:

# InstructLab UI Technical Overview

This is a [NextJS](https://nextjs.org) framework with [Patternfly](https://www.patternfly.org/get-started/develop/) UI library components.

## Manually Running the React UI

Set the .env in the ui directory and run the following:

```bash
cd ui/
npm install
npm run dev
# or for prod
npm run build
npm run start
```

## Other helpful NPM Commands

```bash
# Run a production build (outputs to ".next" dir)
npm run build

# Start the Next.js server (run a production build)
npm run start

# Lint the project
npm run lint

# Automatically fix linting issues
npm run lint:fix

# Format code using Prettier
npm run pretty

# Run type checking
npm run type-check

```

## Make scripts

Podman is a requirement. Install and init instructions [here](https://podman.io/docs/installation).

```bash
# Run markdown linter
make md-lint
```

## Deploying the UI stack in KIND cluster

Set the .env in the ui directory and run the following:

```bash
make start-dev
```

This will start the kind cluster and deploy the ui stack related manifest files in the cluster.

To stop the kind cluster and delete the ui stack related resources, run the following:

```bash
make stop-dev
```

Use `make help` to see all the available commands.

## OAuth Configuration

You can either set up the Oauth app in your
[GitHub](https://docs.github.com/en/apps/oauth-apps/building-oauth-apps/creating-an-oauth-app)
account or use the user/pass defined in `.env`. To change those defaults, create
the `/ui/.env` file and fill in the account user/pass with the following.

Example [.env](../.env.example) file.

## Local Dev Chat Environment

### 1) Using the ilab command line tool

For the chat functionality to work you need a ilab model chat instance. To run this locally:

`cd server`

[https://github.com/instructlab/instructlab?tab=readme-ov-file#-getting-started](https://github.com/instructlab/instructlab?tab=readme-ov-file#-getting-started)

After you use the `ilab serve` command you should have, by default, a chat server instance running on port 8000.

### 2) Using Podman

#### Current issues

- The docker image that runs the server does not utilise Mac Metal GPU and therefore is very slow when answering prompts
- The docker image is very large as it contains the model itself. Potential to have the model incorporated via a docker volume to reduce the size of the actual image.

`docker run -p 8000:8000 aevo987654/instructlab_chat_8000:v2`

This should run a server on port 8000

### Configuring the chat environment to use a local ilab model chat instance

Return back to the root of the repo (ui) and run `npm run dev` and visit [http://localhost:3000/playground/endpoints](http://localhost:3000/playground/endpoints).

Click the `Add Endpoint` button and a popup modal will appear.

![enter image description here](../public/dev-local-chat-server/add-endpoint.png)

- URL - add `http://127.0.0.1:8000`
- Model Name - add `merlinite-7b-lab-Q4_K_M.gguf`
- API Key - add some random characters

Click the `Save` button

![enter image description here](../public/dev-local-chat-server/added-endpoint.png)

Go to the chat interface [http://localhost:3000/playground/chat](http://localhost:3000/playground/chat) and select the `merlinite-7b-lab-Q4_K_M.gguf` model.

![enter image description here](../public/dev-local-chat-server/select-the-correct-model.png)

The chat interface should now use the server.

![enter image description here](../public/dev-local-chat-server/successful-chat.png)

Commit message:

Add support for navigating the taxonomy path for skill and knowledge contribution.
This introduces a new service named pathservice.
This service returns the first level directories
in a specific directory in the tree.

This commit also implements
- Manifest file to deploy the service
- Github jobs to publish the image for the new service
- Makefile target to deploy the entire stack locally on
your machine.
- Dev doc updates with the instruction on the entire
UI stack can be deployed on local machine as well as
on kind cluster.

Signed-off-by: Anil Vishnoi <vishnoianil@gmail.com>

docs/development.md, after:

# InstructLab UI Technical Overview

This is a [NextJS](https://nextjs.org) framework with [Patternfly](https://www.patternfly.org/get-started/develop/) UI library components.

## Manually Running the React UI

Set the .env in the ui directory and run the following:

```bash
cd ui/
npm install
npm run dev
# or for prod
npm run build
npm run start
```

## Other helpful NPM Commands

```bash
# Run a production build (outputs to ".next" dir)
npm run build

# Start the Next.js server (run a production build)
npm run start

# Lint the project
npm run lint

# Automatically fix linting issues
npm run lint:fix

# Format code using Prettier
npm run pretty

# Run type checking
npm run type-check

```

## Make scripts

Podman is a requirement. Install and init instructions [here](https://podman.io/docs/installation).

```bash
# Run markdown linter
make md-lint
```

## Deploying the UI stack on your local machine

Set the .env in the ui directory and make sure you uncomment the `IL_UI_DEPLOYMENT=dev`. Once .env file is setup, run the following:

```bash
make start-dev-local
```

This will start the UI and the dependent pathservice locally on the machine.

> [!NOTE]
> It might ask for permission to allow to listen on port 4000.

To stop the the local dev environment run the following:

```bash
make stop-dev-local
```

## Deploying the UI stack in KIND cluster

Set the .env in the ui directory and run the following:

```bash
make start-dev-kind
```

This will start the Kind cluster and deploy the UI stack related manifest files in the cluster.

To stop the Kind cluster and delete the UI stack related resources, run the following:

```bash
make stop-dev-kind
```

Use `make help` to see all the available commands.

## OAuth Configuration

You can either set up the Oauth app in your
[GitHub](https://docs.github.com/en/apps/oauth-apps/building-oauth-apps/creating-an-oauth-app)
account or use the user/pass defined in `.env`. To change those defaults, create
the `/ui/.env` file and fill in the account user/pass with the following.

Example [.env](../.env.example) file.

## Local Dev Chat Environment

### 1) Using the ilab command line tool

For the chat functionality to work you need a ilab model chat instance. To run this locally:

`cd server`

[https://github.com/instructlab/instructlab?tab=readme-ov-file#-getting-started](https://github.com/instructlab/instructlab?tab=readme-ov-file#-getting-started)

After you use the `ilab serve` command you should have, by default, a chat server instance running on port 8000.

### 2) Using Podman

#### Current issues

- The docker image that runs the server does not utilise Mac Metal GPU and therefore is very slow when answering prompts
- The docker image is very large as it contains the model itself. Potential to have the model incorporated via a docker volume to reduce the size of the actual image.

`docker run -p 8000:8000 aevo987654/instructlab_chat_8000:v2`

This should run a server on port 8000

### Configuring the chat environment to use a local ilab model chat instance

Return back to the root of the repo (ui) and run `npm run dev` and visit [http://localhost:3000/playground/endpoints](http://localhost:3000/playground/endpoints).

Click the `Add Endpoint` button and a popup modal will appear.

![enter image description here](../public/dev-local-chat-server/add-endpoint.png)

- URL - add `http://127.0.0.1:8000`
- Model Name - add `merlinite-7b-lab-Q4_K_M.gguf`
- API Key - add some random characters

Click the `Save` button

![enter image description here](../public/dev-local-chat-server/added-endpoint.png)

Go to the chat interface [http://localhost:3000/playground/chat](http://localhost:3000/playground/chat) and select the `merlinite-7b-lab-Q4_K_M.gguf` model.

![enter image description here](../public/dev-local-chat-server/select-the-correct-model.png)

The chat interface should now use the server.

![enter image description here](../public/dev-local-chat-server/successful-chat.png)
